---
layout: single
title: LaTeX Tutorial (1)
katex: True
permalink: /LaTeX/LaTeXTutorial1/
toc: true
toc_label: "LaTeX"
toc_sticky: true
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/LaTeX.png
sidebar:
 nav: "LaTeX"
---
### Why $$\LaTeX$$

According to [Overleaf](https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Learn_LaTeX_in_30_minutes):


"LATEX is used all over the world for scientific documents, books, as well as many other forms of publishing. Not only can it create beautifully typeset documents, but it allows users to very quickly tackle the more complicated parts of typesetting, such as inputting mathematics, creating tables of contents, referencing and creating bibliographies, and having a consistent layout across all sections. Due to the huge number of open source packages available (more on this later), the possibilities with LATEX are endless. These packages allow users to do even more with LATEX, such as add footnotes, draw schematics, create tables etc.



One of the most important reasons people use LATEX is that it separates the content of the document from the style. This means that once you have written the content of your document, we can change its appearance with ease. Similarly, you can create one style of document which can be used to standardise the appearance of many different documents. This allows scientific journals to create templates for submissions. These templates have a pre-made layout meaning that only the content needs to be added. In fact there are hundreds of templates available for everything from CVs to slideshows."



### How to learn $$\LaTeX$$
There are plenty of Youtube Videos online. You can also learn quite extensively in the overleaf website. I have also released some of my tex codes so you can have an idea of what's happening.




If you can't view it below please press [HERE]({{site.url}}/assets/Beamer_Presentation.pdf)


### Tutorial 
<iframe src="{{site.url}}/assets/Beamer_Presentation.pdf" width="100%" height="500px">