---
layout: single
katex: True
title: An Introduction to This Website
toc: true
toc_label: "An Introduction to This Website"
toc_sticky: true
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/Wolf.png
---
# New Welcoming Page! (Beta)

My New Welcome Page is still under construction! See if you like it!
{: .text-center}
{: .notice--danger}

[PLEASE PRESS HERE](https://henry-yip.github.io/Splash/)
{: .text-center}
{: .notice--warning}
# Introduction 
## Before making a website
### LaTeX
In February, I began learning $$\LaTeX$$ and created tons of math documents. While it was fun, I didn't really have a platform to put all these documents so it was kinda pointless. 
(I created some documents on Quantum Mechanics and some basic math. (It looks quite bad, but hey it was my 3rd day doing $$\LaTeX$$, so I was quite glad it worked somehow)

## How I learnt to build a website
In March, I decided that creating a website is probably beneficial to me, and since my friend used Jekyll, I began looking into it. 

If you are asking what Jekyll is or how to download/use it, please check out [My Tutorials]({% link _Jekyll/2022-05-19-Jekylltutorial.markdown %}). I spent a huge amount of time on these tutorials so I hope you can at least have a look...
{: .notice--warning}

As I didn't have previous experience, it was a complete disaster as I spent almost 2 days downloading all the necessary stuff (If you want to use Jekyll there are tons of stuff you should download. 

You should probably refer to [My Tutorial on How to Download Jekyll]({% link _Jekyll/2022-05-19-JekyllComparision.markdown %})
{: .notice--warning}

## Why THIS particular website
After sucessfully creating a functional website, I started to think about how I can use this website to create something big. One day, upon the recommendation of [Leo Chow]({% link _Contributors/2022-07-31-Leo.markdown %}), I decided to create a website to teach people physics, but we slowly figured out it is quite impractical unless we know **Manim** (but we both don't). Instead, I thought it would just be great if my friends can write anything on my website without any restrictions (since not everyone know how to make a website) I started asking people around me , and surprisingly, almost all of them agreed. (Special thanks to all my contributors, especially [Leo Chow]({% link _Contributors/2022-07-31-Leo.markdown %}) for all their supportive work). And after a month or so, two of my classmates from spcc asked if I can create a **STEM project** with them, so now I'm sorta co-leading the website design of two projects.

## How I feel about building a website
The process of building websites is **JUST PAINFUL**. I had to learn so many stuff. Like how to enable RSS FEED, [How to Change Skins]({% link _Jekyll/2022-05-22-JekyllSkins.markdown %}) (in my old website), how to [Include Algolia Search]({% link _Jekyll/2022-06-08-Algolia.markdown %}). Each of these tasks spent me **at least 10 hours**. The solution may seem easy and to be honest, some problems I can't even solve (like resizing images using plugins). 

# Final Touch
As [I'm currently a Year 2 Student]({% link _Contributors/2022-05-19-Henry.markdown %}), I don't have much time to maintain this website. If you want to collaborate with me/have further enquiries please contact me:

**[Henry, YIP Ho Yin](mailto:s2231321@ed.ac.uk)**
{: .notice--success}
{: .text-center}

