---
layout: single
title: Two Interesting Questions related to Free Fall 
katex: True
tags: 
 - Classical Mechanics
toc: true
toc_label: "Free Fall"
toc_sticky: true
sidebar:
 nav: "Free Fall"
---
This post involves two questions related to free falling. The first is about the terminal velocity of human and a plane under turbulent flow, and the second is about what happens if a human drops to the center of the earth. The results are highly fasicinating!

## Free Fall of objects

Inspired by a conversation in Shenzhen, I am trying to compare the terminal velocity of a human and a plane under turbulent flow:

Consider $$a=\dot{v(t)}$$, we have $$F=m\dot{v}$$. Now consider downwards as positive. Assume air resistance is $$kv^2$$, where $$k \in \mathbb{R}$$. Then we have:

$$
\begin{aligned}
 m\dot{v}&=mg-kv^2 \\
 m \frac{dv}{dt}&=mg-kv^2 \\
 mdv&=(mg-kv^2)dt \\
 \frac{mdv}{mg-kv^2}&=dt \\
\int_{0}^{v}  \frac{mdv}{mg-kv^2} &= \int_{0}^{t}dt \\
t&=\int_{0}^{v}  \frac{mdv}{mg-kv^2} 
 \end{aligned}
 $$

 Where we assumed $$v(0)=0$$

$$
\begin{equation}
\int \frac{d v}{m g-k v^2}  =\frac{1}{m g} \int\frac{d v}{1-\frac{k}{m g} v^2} \\
\end{equation}
$$

Evaluate the indefinite integral first, if we assume $$u=\sqrt\frac{k}{mg} v$$, hence $$\sqrt\frac{mg}{k} du=dv$$, we have:

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\frac{1}{\sqrt{m g k}} \int \frac{d u}{1-u^2} \\
& =\frac{1}{\sqrt{m g k}} 
\tanh ^{-1}(u) \\
&=\frac{1}{\sqrt{m g k}} \tanh ^{-1}\left(v \sqrt{\frac{k}{m g}}\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

The reader can easily check that the definite integral is the same, i.e.

$$t=\frac{1}{\sqrt{m g k}} \tanh ^{-1}\left(v \sqrt{\frac{k}{m g}}\right)$$

After this we can do some algebraic manipulations to get :
\begin{equation}
v=\sqrt {\frac{mg}{k}}\tanh[(\sqrt{mgk})(t)] 
\end{equation}

As $$\tanh(x)$$ approaches $$1$$, $$v_\text{Terminal}=\sqrt{\frac{mg}{k}}$$

Next, we have to find the value of $$k$$:
Using [drag equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_equation), assuming turbulent flow:

$$
 F_{\mathrm{d}}=\frac{1}{2} \rho  c_{\mathrm{d}} A v^2
$$
Hence:

$$
\begin{aligned}
v_\text{Terminal}&=\sqrt{\frac{mg}{k}} \\
&=\sqrt{\frac{2mg}{\rho c_d A}}
\end{aligned}
$$

As $$m_\text{human}$$<<<$$m_\text{plane}$$, the difference in $$c_d$$ and $$A$$ can't compensate, and hence terminal velocity of planes are much higher during free fall.

### Exercises for the reader
 - Why is the ODE separable (University Year 1)
 - Develop the theory if the air resistance is linearly proportional to velocity. (Difficulty: University Year 1-2)
 - What are the terminal velocies for the plane and the human if there is no air resistance?  Why? (Difficulty: HKDSE F4)

## Dropping to center of earth

How long does it take to drop to the center of earth and what will happen after that?

Force acting on the ball:

$$F=G\frac{M'm}{r^2}$$

where:

$$M'=M\frac{r^3}{R^3}$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
m\ddot{r}&=G\frac{Mm}{R^3}r \\
\ddot{r}&=G\frac{M}{R^3}r
\end{aligned}
$$

Any physics student should recognise this as a simple harmonic motion with frequency:

$$\omega=\sqrt{\frac{GM}{R^3}}$$

This corresponds to a period of:

$$T=2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{R^3}{GM}}$$

### Dubious Assumption?

The astute reader will notice that this assumes the gravitational force is **only** contributed from the enclosed mass. Why is this true?

### Gauss' Law for Gravitation

Gauss' Law for electromagnetism (Maxwell's First Law) is very well known, but his law for gravitation is equally important. 

Gauss' Law for Gravitation states that:

$$
\nabla \cdot \boldsymbol{g} = -4\pi G \rho
$$

This can be shown using the steps below. The details are left as an exercise for the readers (see below)

$$
\begin{aligned}
\nabla \cdot\mathbf{g}(\mathbf{r})&=-G \int  \rho(\mathbf{s}) \left [\nabla \cdot\frac{(\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{s})}{|\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{s}|^3} \right] d^3 \mathbf{s} \\
&=-4 \pi G \int \rho(\mathbf{s}) \delta(\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{s}) d^3 \mathbf{s} 
\end{aligned}
$$

As gravitational force on a particle is proportional to the gravitational field, and gravitaitonal field is only proportional to the mass enclosed, we can concude that gravitational force is **only** contributed from the enclosed mass. 

### Exercises for the reader
$$
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{A}=\frac{1}{r^2} \frac{\partial\left(r^2 A_r\right)}{\partial r}+\frac{1}{r \sin \theta} \frac{\partial}{\partial \theta}\left(A_\theta \sin \theta\right)+\frac{1}{r \sin \theta} \frac{\partial A_{\varphi}}{\partial \varphi}
$$ can be assumed while attempting the exercises.
 - Show that $$\nabla \cdot (\frac{\mathbf{r}}{\lVert\mathbf{r}\rVert})^3=\left(\frac{1}{r^2}\right)(0)=0$$ for $$r \neq 0$$.  (Difficulty: University Year 1-2)
 - Use divergence theorem to show what happens at $$r=0$$. (Difficulty: University Year 1-2)
 - Show: $$
\oiint_{\partial V} \mathbf{g} \cdot d \mathbf{A}=-4 \pi G M
$$ (Difficulty: University Year 1-2)
